[SOUND] The term content model refers
to the full behavior the browser
applies to the elements
belonging to that content model,
and to the nesting rules
of those elements.
In other words, which elements are allowed
to be nested inside which other elements.
Prior to HTML5 specification,
HTML elements were either block level or
inline elements.
HTML5 split these two content
models into seven models.
So, things got a bit more complicated.
Let me go over the two
traditional models anyway.
And I will explain in
a moment why I am doing that.
All elements fall into
basically two categories
under the traditional
content model structure.
Either block level elements or
inline elements.
Block level elements render to
begin on the new line by default.
You could change that with CSS but we're
not talking about CSS at this point, yet.
So what that means is every
time you specify a block-level
element in HTML, the browser will
automatically place that element
on a new line in the flow of the document.
Block-level elements are allowed
to contain inline or
other block-level elements within them.
This is in contrast to inline elements,
which render on the same line by default.
Again you can change that, but
by default it renders on the same line.
Which means if you put a whole bunch of
in line elements next to each other, they
will all be going on on the same line, as
if there is no new line character present.
Inline elements also have
a restriction that they can only
contain other in line elements.
In other words,
an inline element cannot have as part
of its content a block level element.
Now I told you that HTML5
really replaces these
definitions with a more complex
set of content categories.
So why are we going over them now?
Well the reason we're going over
them now is because this distinction
between block level elements and
inline elements remains pretty practical.
Because it aligns very well
with still existing CSS rules.
So even though HTML5 came up
with new content model names and
new sub categories, and
just new way to break them down.
At the end of the day,
you could still look at all of these,
as far as your coding is concerned, as
block-level elements and inline elements.
Obviously, it's a little bit of
an over-simplification, but it works.
And just to be kind of complete,
block-level elements roughly translate
into the new HTML5 category of
flow content, and inline elements
roughly translate into the HTML5
category of phrasing content.
So let's go look at some code that
will demonstrate these concepts.
Demonstrate the difference between
block-level elements and inline elements,
we're going to take look at an HTML
document called div and span the HTML.
It's look Located in
the examples Lecture05 folder.
Perhaps the most generic elements
in each category are the div and
the span elements.
And these are the elements we're
going to introduce in this document.
The div element stands for division,
and the span element stands for span.
The div element is your most
generic block-level element, and
the span is your super generic,
inline element.
So let's go over this document real quick.
We have a couple of divs following
one after the other, DIV 1 and DIV 2.
Then, there's a span
element that follows DIV 2.
And the number 3 div is a little
bit more complex in that
it includes a span element inside of it.
So let's take a look at what
this looks like in a browser.
So you can see the DIV 1 element
is all by itself on its own line.
And so is DIV 2 element,
all by itself on its own line.
Now the Span 1 was a tag, an element,
that followed directly after DIV 2.
And even though span is an inline element,
since DIV 2 requires that
it be on it's own line.
It pushes the next inline element
to it's own line as well.
And this is exactly what
happens with DIV 3.
Even though span is an inline element,
technically speaking the tags shouldn't
go anywhere but right behind SPAN 1.
But since DIV 3 is a block level
element it requires it's own line so
it's get pushed to the next
line to be by itself.
Now the spin two tag is sitting
inside the div three and
since it's an inline element it
doesn't cause any more formatting And
it just sits right here inside the DIV
3 without requiring a new line.
So just there's no confusion, the new
line characters that follow the div tags
make absolutely no difference to
the html page and how it renders.
I could remove all the new line
characters, save the document, and
preview it in the browser.
Again, and as you could see
in terms of formatting, and
in terms of requiring new lines,
nothing gets changed.
As the last step,
let's try to take the code from our page,
copy it, and
validate it in the W3C validator.
As you can see, the page is valid.
But what happens if I go ahead and,
right inside our validator,
add another div tag right inside
the span tag with some content.
And I'll close the div tag,
and let's check the page.
And now you can see it's complaining that
element div not allowed is a child of span
element and it's context, and it's telling
you the context in which div element might
be used is flow content and content model
of span element is phrasing content.
And again phrasing content roughly
translates into inline content.
And flow content roughly translates
into block level content.
I'll provide a couple of URL's for
you to explore a little bit further
into different categories of
the HTML5 content models.
But I'd like to demo one real quick, and
that is the W3C kinds of content section,
where it basically lists the seven
types of content that HTML5 defines.
What's cool about this page is that
you could roll over different parts
of this graphic and
you could see all the different elements
that belong to this particular
HTML5 content model category.
So to summarize, we compared block
level and inline content types and
which we know are not part of
the official HTML5 classification.
But they're still used quite often in
literature and just in the regular coding
and they're roughly equivalent to flow
content and phrasing content respectively.
Next we're going to
talk about headings and
we're going to explore some
new HTML5 semantic elements.